Welcome to this special sessions of the
executive sport management training level
one that we have called Sport leaderships
in Africa conversations with sport
management experts.
Today,
we're honored to be joined by a
distinguished guests, Mr.
Sombwa Musunsa,
the Director General of the National
Sport Council of Zambia.
My name is Gonzalo Bravo and I am a
Professor of Sport Management in the
School of Sports Science.
West Virginia University is a true
privilege to moderate today's
conversations as a part of this training
initiative.
So, Mr.
Mr.
Musunsa has been at the forefront of
sport development in Zambia and brings
with him a wealth of experience in
managing sport systems,
implementing national policy and
promoting sport as a tool for social and
economic development.
His leaderships and contribution has been
instrumental in shaping the sport
landscape in Zambia and offer valuable
lessons for the broader African context
and beyond.
We're truly grateful to have this
opportunity to hear from him and to learn
more about the challenges and
opportunities facing sport management
across the continent.
Thank you for joining us, Mr.
Musunsa.
Thank you.
It's a pleasure.
So let's start with with a little bit
about you, OK?
So could you start by telling us a bit
about your background, OK,
What passed LED you to your current role
as Director general of the National
Sports Council of Zambia?
Thank you so much.
To start with 20 years of academic and
professional experience in sport,
working for different organizations,
but also working at different levels in
terms of the sport development continent.
So I've been an administrator for quite
some time,
having gotten my first degree in physical
education and sport from the
International School of Physical
Education and Sport in Cuba and then
getting my master's,
an executive master's in sport
organization management through Olympic
Solidarity and University of Leveng in
Europe.
I did.
I have worked for a number of
organizations,
notable ones including the what was what
we used to call the Olympic Youth
Development Center,
now called the OITC Zambia,
which is an International Olympic
Committee Sport for all project,
the first ever to be built in the in the
world with the next one built in Haiti.
And then I did work,
I've worked for the government of the
Republic of Zambia through the Ministry
of Youth Sport and Arts as a sport,
as a sports officer.
I did also work for a sport for
development NGO in the southern part of
Zambia called Play it Forward.
It's also got offices in the UKI went
down South, Botswana.
Botswana is the one of our neighboring
countries for the African Union Sports
Council Region 5 as a,
as a programs manager.
And then after a couple of years,
I decided to get back to Zambia to head
the National Sports Council of Zambia,
where I work as a CEO.
So I've, I have, I worked the, you know,
with a number of organizations,
especially the national federations,
but also at regional level.
I've worked with the Confederations of
Sport, Sport for development, NGOs,
different governments and a number of
sport organization like the Sport Leaders
Institute of Zimbabwe.
Well, that's an incredible background,
an incredible, you know, experience.
Just by curiosity.
So you said that you did your training in
Cuba.
So are you fluent in Spanish?
How, how did the language become,
you know, a matter of, you know, I would,
I would.
I wouldn't care.
Indeed, I know you.
You must be fluent in Spanish.
But I do speak.
Yeah, it indeed, I do speak,
but sometimes it's quite difficult
because I don't have so many people to
practice with.
But when we're in Cuba,
we had a lot of people or colleagues
coming from different continents,
especially South America, Central America,
the Caribbean islands.
We did have some from the United States.
The African were quite a number of
African countries represented in Cuba and
then also South Asian students that were
also there.
So there was nothing else the other
language that you could use in class
other than Spanish from day one.
Right, Right.
Right.
No, that's, that's interesting.
I was curious about when you were
mentioned.
Wow.
You know,
that that's a that's that's a pretty
major thing, you know, language.
Yeah.
So, so I'm really impressed about,
you know, your background.
Yeah.
So let's let's, let's,
let's talk a little bit about, you know,
Zambia in general first, you know,
so for those less familiar with what's,
you know, the sports, you know,
traditions and, you know,
accolades in Zambia,
could you provide us an overview
basically of the sport landscape in
Zambia?
You know, in terms of, you know,
how it is organized very briefly,
you know,
but also and what has been some of the
major countries, you know,
achievements in terms of international
sports, You know the words, why?
Who are those, you know,
national heroes in terms of sports in
Zambia?
Indeed.
So when you look at the Zambia sports
development sector in general,
it's similar to most of the African
countries that we have.
It's basically managed or hugely managed
by the government and then this is
represented by the ministry in charge of
sport and recreation.
So in Zambia,
we have the Ministry of Youth,
Sport and Arts that presides over most of
the sport development programs in the
country.
But under the Ministry of Sport,
which has got the Department of Sport,
we have the National Sports Council of
Zambia, which is coordination,
registration of national federations,
you know, across the country.
So we have about 60 national federations
that are affiliated to the National
Sports Council of Zambia.
But we do work closely with other sports
organizations like the National Olympic
Committee of Zambia that is in charge of
participation of Zambian athletes in the
Olympic Games,
Commonwealth Games and other related
events.
We do have the National Paralympic
Committee of Zambia in charge of
participation of Zambian athletes in
Paralympic Games and related events.
We do also have new organizations like
Special Olympics of Zambia.
We do work we sport for social change Ng
OS like Sporting Action Asia,
Sport N Spa and a few other organizations
that are spread across the country.
On the other hand,
we do work under the same umbrella in
terms of sport.
We work closely with the Ministry of
Education in promoting physical education
and sport.
And we have a few other organizations
that are also affiliated to the Ministry
of Education that we consider to be
stakeholders.
So this is the the sporting landscape in
Zambia is obviously derived from the
British system in terms of management.
I know the British system has evolved
over the years.
Britain was aware our colonizers and so
we did adopt some of their systems,
including how we manage sport.
But when you look at the bit of history
in terms of sport, it was brought,
the organized sport was brought or
contemporary sport was brought to Zambia
by the British.
And some of the popular sports we have
football which is called soccer in in the
United States.
And then you have netball,
you have cricket and a few other sport
balls.
And it was largely centered around what
we call the copper belt where we produce
a lot of copper.
My induce amber is one of the largest
copper producing countries in the world.
And so we had the number of Europeans in
on that,
that where mining copper or involved in
mining activities,
but also in the free time they would
participate in organized sport.
Further the natives that is the Zambian's
now even before we got independence in
1964, we are also involved in football,
mostly in football and a few other
activities.
So you'll find that sport was more
developed in this region and then started
spreading to other regions.
And this is where we are.
And when you look at the copper belt,
it's the cradle of sport development in
the country.
That's where you get most of the talented
athletes this country has ever produced,
especially in football.
Obviously the tide has changed.
We have got a few that are coming from
where we are in the in Zambia in terms of
the capital city,
we have got some that are coming from the
southern and other provinces.
So when you look at the some of Zambia's
icons, most of them the old ones,
they come from the copper belt.
You're talking about Kamusha Waria,
who was part of the national team for
football and also voted as the 1988
African Player of the Year,
came from the copper belt.
When you look at Samuel Mateteo,
who is who,
who gave us the a silver medal,
is the first silver medal at the Olympic,
which were in Atlanta in 1996,
came from the copper belt.
And if you look at Keith Miller,
who was the first Zambian to ever win a
medal in the 1970s in the in the Olympic
Games, came from the copper belt.
So you have got a number of icons that
have made from the copper belt but we
have got new ones like Zalasam Konga who
is one of is is is the fourth fastest 400
meter athletes in the world and also gave
us the set Zambia medal,
a bronze medal in the Olympics.
So we have had a number of icons in terms
of individuals but also we have had teams
like the Zambia National Football team
that won the African Cup in the 2012.
That was the first time that Zambia ever
won an African Cup in football.
But we have other teams, other sports,
sports that also have athletes that have
become icons,
most of them coming from athletics,
boxing, judo,
football itself and the few from netball
and other sports boards.
No, that's that's an incredible,
you know what you talk about the history
in terms of, you know, the in being like,
you know,
adopting like the British systems, right.
And another interesting point that you
mentioned about, you know,
the copper belt, you know,
and I was very listening,
very careful about that because you know,
I come from a country which is also
copper is the major industry as well.
So,
so it is really interesting to see those
commonalities.
But,
but let me let's talk about now in terms
of the challenges, OK,
So not only in Zambia,
but let's say across the continent,
you know, in your view,
what are some of the main challenges
currently affecting the development of
supporting Zambia and how is the National
Sport Council working to address?
So when we are looking at challenges,
we focus on the, you know,
elements of national and international
sporting success.
So we're talking about infrastructure
capacity development for coaches and
other players in sport.
We're talking about sports science and
sport medicine.
We're talking about athlete welfare and
education and the other elements that
have to do with national and
international sporting success.
So when you look at the infrastructure,
we have inadequate international standard
infrastructure.
Currently,
we have got 2 stadium that can host
international events.
Obviously,
one of them still has challenges,
but we we have one that can adequately
host the international events,
especially when it comes to football.
We do use it also for athletics.
So infrastructure development is still
something that we need to look at in
terms of making sure that we get rid of
some of the challenges that have to do
with accessibility to a high level
infrastructure in the country.
The second one is capacity development of
coaches,
sport administrators and others that
support the sports sector.
So we need to reach a critical mass in
terms of the number of coaches that we
are training or we have coaches that are
able to train our athletes,
advocate to train our athletes at the
highest level of the sporting.
So we don't have in office when it comes
to athletics,
we have basically one course that can be
able to take athletes to the Olympic
Games.
When you look at boxing,
we have one course that can be able to
take boxers to the Olympic Games.
But this is this is not the way things
should be.
So we need more coaches in sports science.
It's something that is the sector that we
have neglected as a country.
Whilst other countries like Boswana and
South Africa advancing in terms of
investment in sports science,
we are still using traditional ways of
identifying talent but also ensuring that
our athletes perform to the optimum
levels.
So we need we we don't have a structured
way of administering sports science and
sport medicine when it comes to attending
to our athletes.
We don't even have specialized clinics or
hospitals that deal with sport medicine
or sports science.
When it comes to financing,
that is the one of the biggest challenges.
Sporting in Zambia is one of the least
funded sectors and that in itself
compounds the rest of the challenges that
we have.
And so we need to address the issue of
structured,
structured and structured approach in
terms of how we find sport.
We need to look at how we can be able to
come up with a system which is lacking at
the moment in terms of how we find high
performance sport,
How do we find grassroots sport,
who are our partners in terms of
providing adequate financing to sport?
We also have challenges in terms of
appreciation of partners in terms of the
value that is there in investing in sport.
Although it is changing especially in the
last 3-4 years with the new government
that we have,
we have seen a shift in terms of certain
partners appreciating the value that
sport has.
And we are we are looking at an increase
in terms of one off support to sports
events.
But what we're looking for in the long
term is where we have got partners that
are providing funding in a structured way
or in a structured approach.
So those are some of the challenges that
we have.
Others could be, you know,
non adherence to certain protocols
related to safeguarding of athletes and
the wealth and also safeguarding the
welfare of athletes especially when it
comes to education.
Some of the athletes that we have,
some of the top athletes that have have
not gone far in the education.
And for me,
I consider to be an injustice whereby an
athlete is bringing medals to the country,
lifting the Zambian flag high and yet we
are not addressing their challenges when
it comes to their education but also
career development.
So we need to invest more in terms of
athlete welfare,
athlete career development as well as
their their education.
Some of the challenge,
another challenge that obviously is the
effects mostly women but also effects all
of us is where we have not invested
hugely in,
in terms of increasing the number of
women and girls participating in sport.
There was a research professor that was
done in Southern Africa through African
Mutual Sports Council Region 5 and
Stellenbosch University of South Africa,
where it was find found that 17% of the
out of the total number of people
participating in in sport and physical
activity, only 17% represent women.
In other parts,
you'll find that only 1% of women
actually participate in sport,
which is very alarming and that has to
change now and in the near future.
So those are some of the challenges.
Apart from inclusion of people with
disability in sport,
there's still some bit of stigma here and
there,
people or persons with disability and not
fully involved in participation in sport
at different levels,
whether it is mere participation or
competition,
but also at leadership levels.
So quite a number of challenges,
but again, the government,
I'm happy to note that the government
that we have now,
the New Dawn government is taking
important strides and measures to ensure
that we attend to all these challenges
that we have.
And some of the the some of the measures
that have been taken is to increase
investment in sport.
And when you look at the budget that we
have four years ago before this
government came in,
came in in place is way different from
what we have now.
So there's been an exponential growth in
terms of the amount of money that is
being invested in sport.
We still have a long way,
but at least there is that political will
that gives us hope that even as we go
into the future there will be more money
invested in sport.
The government is also looking at
infrastructure development,
rehabilitation of the existing ones,
but also putting up a new infrastructure
in across all the 10 provinces that we
have.
We have got also an increase in terms of
the number of coaches and sport
administrators that are being trained on
a regular basis together with our
partners such as the National Political
Media of Zambia and sports for
development NGOs.
The Minister of Education is also,
you know,
restructuring how they're attending to
physical education.
And we understand that the bedrock of top
talented athletes for going into the
future relies on a very strong of
providing or delivering physical
education as well.
So we need quality physical education and
sport being delivered in schools.
So those are some of the measures that
are being undertaken to see that we
reduce on some of the challenges that we
are facing as a country.
You talk, you talk, you mentioned about,
you know, physical education, right?
You're talking about, you know,
the role of the ministry, you know,
and could you expand a little bit more in
terms of grass roots development,
you know, and specifically about,
you know, the talent development,
you know,
can you share how the National Sport
Council is supporting grassroots sports
and working to identify and nurture young
talent across the country?
Indeed.
So when it comes to,
I'll begin with the National Sports
Policy, which was revised last year,
which is delivered by the Ministry of
your sport and aspect also implemented by
the National Sports Council of Zamba
through the various national sports
federations and other sports groups.
So within the National Sports Policy,
talent identification is one of the
priority areas.
We need to come up with scientific
approaches in terms of talent
identification, which is missing.
In most cases we still depending on
traditional ways of identifying talent
but that is something that is not being
done by the top sporting countries in the
world.
Then we have got a strategic plan our own
as National Sports Council and again
talent education and development
especially for the grass roots is key.
So we have, we, we,
we share the content of the strategic
plan with key stakeholders,
especially in the national federations
and the requirement by National Sports
Council,
all an expectation of the National Sports
Council of the National Federation is
that the need to cast their net wide when
it comes to talent identification.
In most cases you'll find National
Federation's identifying talent across
along the Rhino rail.
We have got one rail that stretches from
the South all the way to the Koppal
province and further up to the northern
province.
But we can't continue that that man.
What about the rest of the provinces?
What are we doing in terms of making sure
that we deliberately come up with
approaches,
talent education strategies and that be
able to help us in response to the to
those challenges,
especially when it comes to funding for
talent identification?
We have come up as a national sports
council working closely with the Ministry
of Youth Sport and as a national
federation's come up with a program that
we call the Rural Sport Development
Program.
This is a new program that has never been
delivered in the country and we just
started doing it recently this year that
will be precise and the main aim is to
take structured sport to the rural areas
that are deprived of organized sport.
So in there one some of the priorities
that we have are talent,
education and development capacity,
development of coaches,
sport administrators and technical
officials,
construction of basic sports facilities
that can be used by rural based athletes.
And we want to involve partners.
When we involve the National Federation
to go to all the rural areas of this
country and identify that it include
these talented athletes in their
programming but also include them in the
national teams and their adventure.
Our hope is that some of these top.
But we can have more.
Some of these athletes will go all the
way to participate in the Region 5 Youth
Games, in the African Games,
in the Commonwealth Games,
all the way up to the Olympic Games.
And we hope that they can be able to
compete favourably,
including winning medals and other when
it comes to major events that are hosted
at the global level.
Now let's let's turn into the some of the
strategic partnerships, you know,
could you talk a little bit about that,
You know, what type of partnerships,
you know, the National Sport Council have,
you know,
whether this is the private sector,
you talk touch a little bit this before
that, you know,
private sector with other governmental,
you know, ministries, you know,
or even international, you know,
organizations in terms of, you know,
support the whole sport development in
some way indeed.
So when you look at the our main funders
are the government that is at local level,
but we do work with the National Olympic
Committee of Zambia,
especially when it comes to capacity
development in especially for coaches and
sport administrators.
But we do also conduct joint events at
different levels in terms of promotion of
sport across the country.
We work with a number of sport for
development NGOs.
Some of the popular ones that have also
made a mark at the global level include
Sport in Action,
the National Organization of Women in
Physical Activity and in Sports,
Physical Activity and Recreation.
These are some of the sport for
development NGOs apart from played
forward down in the South of this country
that actually complementing government
efforts,
especially when it comes to grassroots
sport development.
Women inclusion inclusion of people with
stability in sport.
You know,
issues to do with the use of sport as a
tool for prevention and reduction of HIV
and AIDS,
but also NGOs that are involved in using
sports to create an income or empowering
people that are coming from vulnerable
sections of our society.
So we do work also with the private
sector.
Like I mentioned before,
we have seen an increase in the number of
private sector organizations that are
partnering with us,
supporting different events,
especially marathons,
talent education programs,
hosting of events and so on and so forth
across the region.
We do work with African Union Sports
Council Region 5.
Mind you,
Africa in terms of the sports development
is divided in five regions.
So ours is Region 5,
but we've got Region 1 which is in the
north of Africa,
Region 2 is in West Africa,
Region 4 is in Central Africa region,
Region 3 and then Region 4 is in East
Africa and then Region 5 is where Zambia
is, South Africa, Zimbabwe,
Botswana and Namibia and a few other
countries.
So we do work with the African Union in,
in different areas,
whether it's high performance sport,
whether it's participation in high level
Region 5 youth games and other events.
We have not spread our wings very much in
terms of working with others,
other organizations away from the region.
But before then we used to work with the
with the, an organization called NIF,
which is the National Olympic,
the Olympic Committee and Confederation
of Sport of Norway.
So we worked with them quite a lot when
it,
when we were delivering back in the days
when we're delivered what we use for the
sports or project.
We have not worked with them closely or
directly, but we work with,
they work with the number of sports NGOs
in the country.
They work with the number of national
federations and they do work with the
African Union Sports Council Region 5.
When I was working as programs manager at
the African Union Sports Council Region 5,
I did work closely with them,
especially when it came to capacity
development programs for coaches and
sport administrators,
but also the use of sport as a tool for
gender inclusion and equity.
Now in terms of a strategic vision, OK,
what are the Council's key strategic
priorities over the next five years and
what do you see the greatest
opportunities for growth indeed, you know,
you know the order per say,
but number one,
capacity development of coaches,
sport administrators, technical officials.
We need to increase the number of
competent qualified people that are able
to effectively manage sport development
at different levels.
We need people that are able to
effectively manage transfer sport.
We need people that are able to
effectively manage high performance sport.
We need people who are qualified to be
placed in the different organizations
including overarching organizations like
the Ministry of Youth, Sport and Arts.
We need qualified more qualified people
at the Sports Council,
National Olympic Committee and those that
are heading the national federations.
Infrastructure development is key.
One of our mandate as the National Sports
Council as the enshrined in the Sports
Council of Zambia Act Chapter 142 of 1988
is that we should be able to involve
ourselves in the construction of
facilities,
maintenance of facilities across all the
10 provinces of this country.
The other priority areas is talent
identification.
We need to put in a systematic approach
or system in terms of talent
identification.
That is the only way that we can be able
to, you know,
to achieve more in terms of top
performing athletes that this country can
ever be,
can ever produce that can be able to
perform favourably including winning of
medals at international events.
Some of others include the gender
inclusion and equity,
increasing the number of women and girls
participating,
participating in sport at different
levels.
We need more women participating in
leadership of sport in the country.
We have few,
we have not done so much research as a
country, but we have got very,
very few women but who are leaders in the
different National Federation, sport NGOs,
a sports council itself,
the Ministry of Sport and other related
organizations.
We need more girls participating in sport.
We need more girls being identified,
you know,
to be included in the national teams.
We need parity in terms of we need pay
parity when it comes to rewarding our
athletes right now.
You know,
when it comes to payment of athletes,
the men,
the boys get more money in most of the
sports sports or across the board.
But what is comforting now profits is
that this government that we have
actually has brought in preparatory when
if you look at an example I can give you
is the women football team which is doing
rate at the African level but also has
participated twice at the Olympic Games
and also at the World Cup compared to the
men.
And So what the government did is that
whatever the men get in terms of rewards
is the same amount that the women get,
the same opportunities that the women,
the men are getting are the same
opportunities that the women be able to
get.
So it is working well with football,
it's working well when it comes to
Zambia's participation in multi sport
events.
But we need to ensure that that is that
is obtaining a different levels in all
this in all the federation.
So these are some of the the strategic
priorities including creation of
sustainable partner partnerships with
local and international organizations.
Research is also key.
We are doing very few.
We're,
we're involving ourselves in less
research when it comes to sport
development in the country.
But we need universities that we have
like the University of Zambia,
Croma University to involve themselves in
partnership with the National Sports
Council and other organization to involve
ourselves in research.
Because when we conduct research,
we are making decisions based on facts
and not empirical knowledge.
So we it's,
those are some of the priorities that we
have.
There could be more,
but also these priorities are supported
by different strategies.
So that at the end of the day,
it's not just the medals that we are
looking at.
We are looking at empowering these young
people.
We are looking at empowering the
Zambian's through sport and physical
activity.
Mr.
Musunsa,
thank you very much for your thoughtful
reflections and for sharing your
experience with us today.
Your insights provide an invaluable
perspective into the management of
Sporting Zambia and across the African
continent more broadly right now.
To our participants,
I hope this conversation has enriched
your understanding of how National Sport
Councils operate and the kind of
leaderships and innovations required to
advance sports systems in complex
environments.
Once again, Mr.
Musunsa,
thank you for your time and for joining
us in this important dialogue.